Seneca was among the greatest authors of classical tragedies 
and there was not one educated Elizabethan who was unaware of him or 
his plays. There were certain stylistic and different strategically 
thought out devices that Elizabethan playwrights including Shakespeare 
learned and used from Seneca’s great tragedies. The five act 
structure, the appearance of some kind of ghost, the one line 
exchanges known as stichomythia, and Seneca’s use of long rhetorical 
speeches were all later used in tragedies by Elizabethan playwrights. 
Some of Seneca’s ideas were originally taken from the Greeks when the 
Romans conquered Greece, and with it they took home many Greek 
theatrical ideas. Some of Seneca’s stories that originated from the 
Greeks like Agamemnon and Thyestes which dealt with bloody family 
histories and revenge captivated the Elizabethans. Seneca’s stories 
weren’t really written for performance purposes, so if English 
playwrights liked his ideas, they had to figure out a way to make the 
story theatrically workable, relevant and exciting to the Elizabethan 
audience who were very demanding. Seneca’s influence formed part of a 
developing tradition of tragedies whose plots hinge on political 
power, forbidden sexuality, family honor and private revenge. “There 
was no author who exercised a wider or deeper influence upon the 
Elizabethan mind or upon the Elizabethan form of tragedy than did 
Seneca.” For the dramatists of Renaissance Italy, France and England, 
classical tragedy meant only the ten Latin plays of Seneca and not 
Euripides, Aeschylus and Sophocles. “Hamlet is certainly not much like 
any play of Seneca’s one can name, but Seneca is undoubtedly one of 
the effective ingredients in the emotional charge of Hamlet. Hamlet 
without Seneca is inconceivable.” 
During the time of Elizabethan theater, plays about tragedy 
and revenge were very common and a regular convention seemed to be 
formed on what aspects should be put into a typical revenge tragedy. 
In all revenge tragedies first and foremost, a crime is committed and 
for various reasons laws and justice cannot punish the crime so the 
individual who is the main character, goes through with the revenge in 
spite of everything. The main character then usually had a period of 
doubt , where he tries to decide whether or not to go through with the 
revenge, which usually involves tough and complex planning. Other 
features that were typical were the appearance of a ghost, to get the 
revenger to go through with the deed. The revenger also usually had a 
very close relationship with the audience through soliloquies and 
asides. The original crime that will eventually be avenged is nearly 
always sexual or violent or both. The crime has been committed against 
a family member of the revenger. “ The revenger places himself outside 
the normal moral order of things, and often becomes more isolated as 
the play progresses-an isolation which at its most extreme becomes 
madness.” The revenge must be the cause of a catastrophe and the 
beginning of the revenge must start immediately after the crisis. 
After the ghost persuades the revenger to commit his deed, a 
hesitation first occurs and then a delay by the avenger before killing 
the murderer, and his actual or acted out madness. The revenge must be 
taken out by the revenger or his trusted accomplices. The revenger and 
his accomplices may also die at the moment of success or even during 
the course of revenge. 
It should not be assumed that revenge plays parallel the moral 
expectations of the Elizabethan audience. Church, State and the 
regular morals of people in that age did not accept revenge, instead 
they thought that revenge would simply not under any circumstances be 
tolerated no matter what the original deed was. “ It is repugnant on 
theological grounds, since Christian orthodoxy posits a world ordered 
by Divine Providence, in which revenge is a sin and a blasphemy, 
endangering the soul of the revenger.” The revenger by taking law into 
his own hands was in turn completely going against the total political 
authority of the state. People should therefore never think that 
revenge was expected by Elizabethan society. Although they loved to 
see it in plays, it was considered sinful and it was utterly 
condemned.